add endpoint routing (#16154)
aspnet/AspNetCore.Docs: aspnetcore/fundamentals/routing.md

::: moniker range=">= aspnetcore-3.0"

> Routing is responsible for mapping request URIs to endpoints and dispatching incoming requests to those endpoints. Routes are defined in the app and configured when the app starts. A route can optionally extract values from the URL contained in the request, and these values can then be used for request processing. Using route information from the app, routing is also able to generate URLs that map to endpoints. Most apps don't need custom routes. <!-- Insert here why you would need custom routing -->

Reviewer: I don't know what custom routing means.

Author: @JamesNK  changed this to
 Many apps don't need to add routes beyond what the templates provide. `<!-- Insert here why you would need to add routing -->`

> Routing is responsible for mapping request URIs to endpoints and dispatching incoming requests to those endpoints. Routes are defined in the app and configured when the app starts. A route can optionally extract values from the URL contained in the request, and these values can then be used for request processing. Using route information from the app, routing is also able to generate URLs that map to endpoints. Many apps don't need to add routes beyond what the templates provide. <!-- Insert here why you would need to add routing -->

Author: @JamesNK Do you want to supply the follow up that's commented out?  `<!-- Insert here why you would need to add routing -->`

> Routing is responsible for mapping request URIs to endpoints and dispatching incoming requests to those endpoints. Routes are defined in the app and configured when the app starts. A route can optionally extract values from the URL contained in the request, and these values can then be used for request processing. Using route information from the app, routing is also able to generate URLs that map to endpoints. Many apps don't need to add routes beyond what the templates provide. <!-- Insert here why you would need to add routing -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Routing is responsible for mapping request URIs to endpoints and dispatching incoming requests to those endpoints. Routes are defined in the app and configured when the app starts. A route can optionally extract values from the URL contained in the request, and these values can then be used for request processing. Using route information from the app, routing is also able to generate URLs that map to endpoints. Many apps don't need to add routes beyond what the templates provide. Frameworks like MVC will configure controllers and Razor pages route endpoints for you. If you need to add custom route endpoints to your app then those can be configured alongside framework generated route endpoints.
```

* Routing is connected to the [middleware](xref:fundamentals/middleware/index) pipeline by the <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.RouterMiddleware> class. [ASP.NET Core MVC](xref:mvc/overview) adds routing to the middleware pipeline as part of its configuration and handles routing in MVC and Razor Pages apps. Endpoint data sources are mapped when MVC adds routing to the middleware pipeline. This routing middleware handles matching the template. At the end of the request pipeline a matched endpoint's request delegate is automatically called.
* If the apps endpoints are static, endpoints can be mapped using <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.EndpointRouteBuilderExtensions.MapGet*>, <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.EndpointRouteBuilderExtensions.MapPost*>, and MapVerb helper methods. Static endpoints don't change during the lifetime of the app.

> * If endpoints are dynamic, a custom data source must be created. For example, a new Razor page is added to the app at runtime and needs a new endpoint.

Reviewer: I think the terms static and dynamic might mislead people. Loading route configuration from a file or database at startup is what a lot of people would think of as dynamic, but these would be static routes because they don't change after the app has started.

> 

Reviewer: I think adding a code sample will make endpoint routing easier to understand:

```cs
public void Configure(IApplicationBuilder app)
{
    // Matches request to endpoint
    app.UseRouting();

    // Endpoint aware middleware
    app.UseAuthorization();

    // Endpoint execution
    app.UseEndpoints(endpoints =>
    {
        // Configuration of app endpoints
        endpoints.MapRazorPages();
        endpoints.MapGet("/", context => context.Response.WriteAsync("Hello world"))
        endpoints.MapHealthChecks("/healthz");
    });
}
```

* Endpoint routing integrates with middleware using two extension methods:
  * [UseRouting](xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.EndpointRoutingApplicationBuilderExtensions.UseRouting*) adds route matching to the middleware pipeline. It must come before any route-aware middleware such as authorization, endpoint execution, etc.
  * [UseEndpoints](xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.EndpointRoutingApplicationBuilderExtensions.UseEndpoints*) adds endpoint execution to the middleware pipeline. It runs the request delegate that serves the endpoint's response.
  `UseEndpoints` is also where route endpoints are configured that can be matched and executed by the app. For example, <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.RazorPagesEndpointRouteBuilderExtensions.MapRazorPages*>, <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.ControllerEndpointRouteBuilderExtensions.MapControllers*>, <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.EndpointRouteBuilderExtensions.MapGet*>, and <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.EndpointRouteBuilderExtensions.MapPost*>.

> * If the apps endpoints are static, endpoints can be mapped using <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.EndpointRouteBuilderExtensions.MapGet*>, <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.EndpointRouteBuilderExtensions.MapPost*>, and [MapVerb](xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.EndpointRouteBuilderExtensions) helper methods. Static endpoints don't change during the lifetime of the app.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Apps use ASP.NET Core's helper methods to configure their routes. ASP.NET Core frameworks provide helper methods like <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.RazorPagesEndpointRouteBuilderExtensions.MapRazorPages*>,, <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.ControllerEndpointRouteBuilderExtensions.MapControllers*> and `MapHub<THub>`. There are also helper methods for configuring your own custom route endpoints: <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.EndpointRouteBuilderExtensions.MapGet*>, <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.EndpointRouteBuilderExtensions.MapPost*>, and [MapVerb](xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.EndpointRouteBuilderExtensions). 
```

> * If endpoints are dynamic, a custom data source must be created. For example, a new Razor page is added to the app at runtime and needs a new endpoint. Loading route configuration from a file or database at startup is not dynamic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Endpoint routing also supports endpoints changing after an application has started up. To support endpoints changing at runtime, a custom <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Routing.EndpointDataSource> must be created and registered. Most apps and frameworks don't required endpoints changing at runtime. Endpoints used by an app are typically configured at startup and are static for the lifetime of the app. Loading route configuration from a file or database at startup is not dynamic.
```

>
> * Use <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Routing.LinkGenerator> with caution in middleware in combination with `Map` or `MapWhen`. `Map*` changes the base path of the executing request, which affects the output of link generation. All of the <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Routing.LinkGenerator> APIs allow specifying a base path. Always specify an empty base path to undo `Map*`'s affect on link generation.

## Endpoint routing

* A route endpoint has a template, metadata, and a request delegate that serves the endpoint's response. The metadata is used to implement cross-cutting concerns based on policies and configuration attached to each endpoint. For example, an authorization middleware can interrogate the endpoint's metadata collection for an [authorization policy](xref:security/authorization/policies#applying-policies-to-mvc-controllers).
* Endpoint routing integrates with middleware using two extension methods:

>   * [EndpointRoutingApplicationBuilderExtensions.UseRouting](xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.EndpointRoutingApplicationBuilderExtensions.UseRouting*) adds route matching to the middleware pipeline. It must come before any route-aware middleware such as authorization, endpoint execution, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * [UseRouting](xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.EndpointRoutingApplicationBuilderExtensions.UseRouting*) adds route matching to the middleware pipeline. It must come before any route-aware middleware such as authorization, endpoint execution, etc.
```

>   * [EndpointRoutingApplicationBuilderExtensions.UseEndpoints](xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.EndpointRoutingApplicationBuilderExtensions.UseEndpoints*) adds endpoint execution to the middleware pipeline. It runs the request delegate that serves the endpoint's response.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * [UseEndpoints](xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.EndpointRoutingApplicationBuilderExtensions.UseEndpoints*) adds endpoint execution to the middleware pipeline. It runs the request delegate that serves the endpoint's response.
```

  `UseEndpoints` is also where route endpoints are configured that can be matched and executed by the app. For example, <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.RazorPagesEndpointRouteBuilderExtensions.MapRazorPages*>, <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.ControllerEndpointRouteBuilderExtensions.MapControllers*>, <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.EndpointRouteBuilderExtensions.MapGet*>, and <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.EndpointRouteBuilderExtensions.MapPost*>.

>   The `UseEndpoints` middleware handles matching the template. At the end of the request pipeline a matched endpoint's request delegate is automatically called.

Reviewer: Remove this line. It rehashes info from line 129, and also out of date behavior.

* If the apps endpoints are static, endpoints can be mapped using <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.EndpointRouteBuilderExtensions.MapGet*>, <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.EndpointRouteBuilderExtensions.MapPost*>, and MapVerb helper methods. Static endpoints don't change during the lifetime of the app.
* If endpoints are dynamic, a custom data source must be created. For example, a new Razor page is added to the app at runtime and needs a new endpoint.

> Dynamic routes change after the app starts. For example, loading route configuration from a file or database at startup is not dynamic. Adding a new Razor Page after the app is started is dynamic. Most apps don't use dynamic routes.

Reviewer: Seems like this is duplicating bullet points above

  | `/search/{*page}`  | `/search/admin%2Fproducts` (the forward slash is encoded)             |
  | `/search/{**page}` | `/search/admin/products`                                              |

> * The endpoint routing system is lower level than the MVC routing system.

Reviewer: Hmmm, I don't know about this. In 3.0, MVC routing is endpoint routing. On app startup MVC provides a data source of all its configured routes to endpoint routing.
